---
title: The Compensation Scheme for the Nuclear Power Plant Disaster in Fukushima
weight: 4
type: page
contributors:
    - id: ashina
    - id: stakahashi
    - id: tsuami
    - id: nfujinaga
---

The accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant on March 11, 2011 was caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake and is the most recent large-scale nuclear accident in the world. The accident offers various helpful lessons for our pursuit of a better damage compensation scheme for nuclear power plant accidents.

Section I, written by Yuki Ashina, provides a general outline of the current Japanese nuclear damage compensation scheme and its limitations. Section II reports on the factual basis for compensation; that is, actual damages that the victims of the Fukushima nuclear power plant accident have sustained. The team has followed a common format for summarizing results of interviews and surveys conducted on four types of victims: mandatory evacuees, voluntary evacuees, farmers, and fishers. Collectively, this section of the report is intended to offer a window into the complexity and gravity of actual damages caused by the nuclear power plant accident. Section III, written by Takao Suami, provides a general outline of contentious issues that have surfaced in Japan while nuclear accident damage compensation payments proceed. This section of the report draws attention to limitations to relief for victims through compensation as well as difficulties involved in the design of a compensation scheme.

It is worth noting that since the Fukushima nuclear power plant accident, lawsuits have been filed seeking an injunction on the resumption of operation at various nuclear power plants in Japan. Although these lawsuits have no direct relationship with the issue of compensation, a short report by Nobuyo Fujinaga is added to this report to provide a broader context surrounding the state of nuclear energy in Japan.

## Introduction

_Satsuki Takahashi, Faculty of Sustainability Studies, Hosei University_

Another nuclear-related accident is bound to occur; we just do not know when and where. It is nevertheless a certainty. One thing we should do in preparation for this unavoidable future crisis is to pool our knowledge together. Sharing, engaging in discussion and globally disseminating information about past accidents is particularly meaningful. The goal of this report prepared by members of the “Fukushima Team” of the joint project of Meridian 180 and the Cornell University Mario Einaudi Center for International Studies is to share information about what we have observed and what we have heard through our respective activities related to this most recent nuclear power plant accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant with people within and outside Japan. More specifically, this chapter seeks to outline the current state of the nuclear power plant accident aftermath and draw attention to issues from the perspective of damage compensation.

There are several reasons why we chose to focus on damage compensation for this project. Due to the safety myth surrounding nuclear power plants, the costs of nuclear energy are often calculated based only on the costs of their construction and maintenance. If we assume that nuclear power plant accidents inevitably occur, however, it would be necessary to add in accident-related costs. Moreover, when it comes to post-accident costs, we tend to focus our attention on expenses related to damage compensation. However, we must also consider the existence of damages that cannot be fully taken into account through existing damage compensation schemes. For example, the experiences of voluntary evacuees in which attorney Yuki Ashina has been involved in draw attention to the existence of damages whose monetary value cannot be easily computed. These damages include the loss of hometowns, human relationships, and families.

Problems with Fukushima’s existing damage compensation scheme are also related to the issue of what counts as “recovery.” While damage compensation usually provides payments for things lost, it is important to note that, in the case of nuclear power plant accidents, losses continue to be produced for a long period of time. Thus, losses do not only exist in the past when the actual accident occurred but also in the present and future. Now, nearly ten years following the Fukushima nuclear accident, many continue to question whether the responsibility for damage compensation was fulfilled when evacuation orders were lifted and when farming and fishing resumed. This disaster is indeed still ongoing for the people of Fukushima and recovery continues to be a goal for the distant future. The responsibility for the nuclear accident as well as its costs must be understood in this context of such a long-term recovery process.

The 2011 Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Accident provided an opportunity to discuss the issues surrounding nuclear energy in regions all over the world. While some countries are attempting to reduce their dependence on nuclear power, there are other countries that are about to develop new forms of nuclear power generation. Even in Japan, where the accident actually took place and continues to resonate, the reactivation of nuclear power plants is an argument that divides the country. How should humanity deal with nuclear energy as we turn toward the future? The present international joint project has only just begun its bold attempt to answer such questions and we believe this report will put us on the proper path for developing future discussions.

## Section I

### Overview of the Damage Compensation Scheme for the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant Accident

_Yuki Ashina, Attorney, Shizuoka Bar Association_

#### Introduction

The Fukushima Team of a global working group set up jointly by the Mario Einaudi Center for International Studies at Cornell University and Meridian 180 to conduct a comparative study of nuclear power plant accident compensation schemes focuses its investigation specifically on damage inflicted by the 2011 Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant Accident from a perspective of damage compensation. A certain level of compensation has been already paid to victims of the nuclear accident. To some extent the compensation paid so far has contributed to damage recovery, but there surely exist kinds of damage that have not been indemnified by this compensation. This section addresses one of the group’s goals to introduce the existing damage compensation scheme. The other goals are to show what kinds of damage are being addressed in the current damage compensation scheme and damages are falling between the cracks of this scheme, specifically those regarding different categories of victims; and to visualize the nature of the damages and injuries wrought by the nuclear accident and consider the challenging question of what is necessary for victim relief.

#### Legal Framework

The following is a set of the laws that form the basis for the existing damage compensation scheme. Firstly, because Article 3.1 of the Japanese Act on Compensation for Nuclear Damage (hereafter referred to as the “Nuclear Damage Compensation Act”) stipulates that “in the event of nuclear damage caused by the operation of a nuclear reactor or the like, the nuclear operator involved in the operation of the nuclear reactor or the like bears responsibility for such damage,” the nuclear operator, Tokyo Electric Power Company Holdings, Inc. (TEPCO), is responsible for damage compensation.

However, the total dollar amount of damage compensation exceeds TEPCO’s ability to pay—according to TEPCO’s official public statement: approximately 9.6 trillion yen as of September 30, 2020.[^1] As a result, the Nuclear Damage Compensation Facilitation Corporation Act was enacted in August 2011 based on Article 16 of the Nuclear Damage Compensation Act that stipulates support by the national government. In September of that year, the Nuclear Damage Compensation Facilitation Corporation (now titled the Nuclear Damage Compensation and Decommissioning Facilitation Corporation) was established and, through it, the Japanese national government has been providing compensation funds. Note that this body not only gives financial support to TEPCO but also provides compensation consultation services for victims with the cooperation of a large number of attorneys and notaries public. Over the period from October 2011 to March 2020, a total of 39,239 cases of consultation and information provision (cyclical, permanent-type, etc.) in and outside Fukushima prefecture have been handled.[^2]

#### Criteria for Compensation

The criteria for the provision of damage compensation by TEPCO primarily relies on the guidelines officially published by the Dispute Reconciliation Committee for Nuclear Damage Compensation (hereafter referred to as the Reconciliation Committee) established under Article 18 of the Nuclear Damage Compensation Act. The Reconciliation Committee has published its official guidelines intermittently since April 2011 and because the core criteria, “Interim Guidelines,” were publicized in August of that year, the series of criteria published by the Reconciliation Committee will be referred to in this section as the “Interim Guidelines, etc.”

The Interim Guidelines, etc., have presented uniform and clear criteria and thereby realized simplified and rapid damage compensation, but these criteria are literally interim guidelines and do not constitute the finalized compensation criteria. For this reason, they feature the following characteristics: 1) the awarding and amount of compensation is linked to whether or not evacuation was ordered in the established zone; 2) monetary amounts are uniform and clear (for example, the amount generally awarded for “mental damages” is fixed at 100,000 yen per month per person); and, 3) as a rule, when the evacuation orders are discontinued, so is compensation. Put another way, the Interim Guidelines, etc. have provided uniform criteria about compensation items and the amount of compensation based on the geographical area in which the victims resided at the time of the accident. Residents living outside of the ordered evacuation zones as a rule are not awarded compensation, and the awarded compensation amounts vary widely even for those living inside the evacuation zones, depending on where the victim lived (i.e., in “difficult-to-return zones,” “restricted residential zones,” or “zones in preparation for the lifting of evacuation orders”). That being said, residents will not receive compensation once a zone’s evacuation orders have been lifted.

However, the actual damage cannot be classified or uniformized as simply as the Interim Guidelines, etc. dictate. For residents inside difficult-to-return zones, family composition, occupation, and lifestyle status will differ, as will the damage, loss, and injury they might receive from the accident. At the same time, for residents outside the zones in which evacuation was ordered, there are a considerable number of people who chose to evacuate voluntarily. While these residents would never have evacuated had there not been a nuclear accident, they are nonetheless excluded from nuclear distaster compensation under the Interim Guidelines, etc.

Moreover, TEPCO treats the Interim Guidelines, etc. as though they constitute final compensation criteria, instead of as “interim,” “provisional,” or “temporary,” and does not accept compensation damage claims not described in the Guidelines. While it is obvious that the Interim Guidelines, etc. are not criteria meant to provide aid in accordance with the wide range of individualized circumstances of damages, it is inevitable at the very least that the damage calculated in monetary terms needs to combine “damage compensation receivable under the Interim Guidelines, etc.” and “damage compensation that varies according to the individual” in a tailor-made way for each victim.

#### The Compensation Application Process

It is likely that victims will employ one of the following three methods in their specific compensation request process: (1) a direct claim made to TEPCO in line with the criteria of the Interim Guidelines, etc., (2) an application to the Nuclear Damage Compensation Dispute Resolution Center, or (3) a lawsuit. Each of these has its own advantages and disadvantages.

Firstly, for (1) a direct claim made to TEPCO, a compensation claim may be submitted by merely filling out the prescribed form, with the advantage of simplified and rapid receipt of payments. On the other hand, as described in the preceding paragraph, the disadvantage here is that one cannot receive compensation beyond the criteria stipulated in the Interim Guidelines, etc. Under the Interim Guidelines, etc. those persons excluded from “victim” status cannot make use of this method.

Next, (2) the Nuclear Damage Compensation Dispute Resolution Center (hereafter referred to as “The Center”) is an extra-judicial mediation and conciliation authority in charge of dispute resolution, established under the Dispute Reconciliation Committee for Nuclear Compensation. This route is used by victims seeking compensation in the event that consent to employ the application procedure (1) could not be obtained, or by those seeking damage compensation that takes into consideration one's specific individual circumstances. At the Center, several hundred lawyers work as intermediary committee members and investigators. After they accept victim complaints, they review details while listening to opinions from TEPCO. They then present their proposals for amicable settlements to both sides. Since their proposals are not subject to rejection under the Interim Guidelines, etc., it is possible for victims to receive damage compensation in an amount equal to or greater than that which TEPCO would offer. This procedure can thus be significantly advantageous for victims.

When the Center was first established, TEPCO declared that the company would accept the Center’s proposals and TEPCO initially accepted all of the Center’s proposals. Despite this agreement, however, TEPCO began to refuse some of the Center’s proposals, especially after large-scale complaints arose in the spring of 2004. As TEPCO started refusing to accept settlement proposals, the Center began proposing settlements with reduced compensation amounts, hoping to avoid TEPCO’s refusals. Since the Center's proposals were not legally binding, it became obvious that the Center's overall proficiency in dispute resolution was in decline. Disadvantages surfaced in some cases. Namely, that compensation amounts accepted in direct claims made under method (1) were not reflected in the Center’s settlement proposals. From the victims’ point of view, it was not made clear, at the application stage, whether compensation amounts equal to or more than those specified in the Interim Guidelines would be received or not.

The lawsuit method (3) is the victim’s only choice if either methods (1) or (2) of seeking compensation cannot be pursued. As far as we know, as of August 31, 2019, lawsuits are pending in 18 prefectures nationwide, with the total number of plaintiffs exceeding 12,000

Individuals.[^3] For both direct claims and mediation and conciliation through the Center, the receipt of damage compensation ultimately depends on TEPCO’s consent. On the other hand, a significant advantage of a lawsuit is that it does not require a prior mutual agreement between the parties, and the victim can hope for a favorable decision from the court. However, lawsuits can be disadvantageous from the victim’s point of view in that the procedure takes a considerable amount of time and there is no guarantee that the victim will be happy with the judgment.[^4]

There are many cases in which victims who claim damage compensation are unsatisfied with the results from making only a direct claim (1), and it might seem desirable to apply to the Center (2), or file suit in court (3), but in reality the majority of victims ultimately make only the direct claim (1).

#### Issues with Nuclear Damage Compensation Schemes

The Suami report in this volume delves into the details of the issues surrounding nuclear damage compensation schemes but the authors would like to point out two problematic issues here. First, all victims need a medium that serves a bridging function leading to compensation claims, yet there is a shortage of awareness around connecting victims to means of compensation. The Hamadori region along the coastline of Fukushima Prefecture where the nuclear accident occurred has long been a sparsely populated area and the number of attorneys is also extremely low compared to urban areas. When problems first arose, there was little opportunity to consult an attorney proactively and attempt resolution on a legal basis compared to other regions. Additionally, as a consequence of the recent nuclear accident and forced evacuation of residents, as well as the large number of voluntary evacuees, the original community present in the area was destroyed and the evacuees scattered nationwide among the 47 prefectures of Japan.

As mentioned in the previous section, the damage (and possible levels of compensation) experienced by different individuals varies but strong support from lawyers was still necessary to make specific damage compensation claims. However, destroyed and dispersed communities that are also experiences low levels of rights awareness make it difficult to come up with concrete damage compensation claims, especially in local cities and towns without aggressive leadership in uniting evacuees and gaining compensation. An exception was the town of Namie in Fukushima Prefecture, which spearheaded proactive efforts to address the compensation problem.

Next, there was the fundamental problem that suffering from the nuclear accident would not be relieved by damage compensation alone. The following items in the case reports go into greater detail, but the nuclear accident affected things beyond those that can easily be calculated in terms of economics such as one's home or employment. It is hard to put a number on some of the things that were taken from victims, such as their hometown, community, interpersonal relationships, and purpose in life. The reality is that some damages deprive victims of things upon which no monetary value can be placed—these damages cannot be relieved by means of damage compensation. To achieve a recovery in which each person's purpose in life and human dignity can be regained, a policy focusing on “recovery” must play an essential role. However, in practical terms, the only means available to set evacuees on the path to recovery was the wholly insufficient monetary damage compensation, and recovering the person as a human being has been left behind.

## Section II

### Case Study Reports of Nuclear Damage (1)

**Mandatory Evacuees: The Case of the Town of Namie**

_Takao Suami, Faculty of Law, Waseda University_

#### Damage (Suffering and Damages Sustained by Victims)

According to a Waseda University Great East Japan Earthquake Recovery Legal Aid Project interview survey administered to Namie residents from April to May, 2013 (9,384 respondents), the damage suffered by mandatory evacuees is roughly classified below.

1.  Breakup of the family. There were many three-generation family households in Namie prior to the accident. However, following the accident, in many cases it was impossible to secure a joint residence in the evacuation destination on the same scale as the previous conditions in Namie, so senior citizens had no choice but to live alone.

2.  Income reduction/lifestyle difficulties. Reductions were observed among town residents at all income levels.

3.  Anxiety and mental anguish. Many residents were exposed to a high level of radiation while evacuating from their town. Therefore, they are frightened of future health damage. Furthermore, not only were the residents forced to move against their will, but it was also unclear when they would be able to return home, and even after returning home, the chances were low of being able to go back to the same lifestyle as before. All of these factors cause considerable anxiety about the future.

#### Compensation (i.e., Compensation Paid to Victims Suffering Damages)

The “Dispute Reconciliation Committee for Nuclear Damage Compensation” established based on the Japanese Act on Compensation for Nuclear Damage (hereafter referred to as the Nuclear Damage Compensation Act), in accordance with all guidelines on compensation criteria stipulated after the accident, provides compensation payments to mandatory evacuees for property damage (loss of use of land and housing, loss of income from business shutdowns, etc.) and mental suffering (mental anguish accompanying evacuation). These guidelines were sufficient for managing a large amount of compensation claims in a relatively short period of time but there was strong criticism concerning both how it was formulated and the appropriateness of the compensation amounts.

#### Who Shall Take Responsibility? People and Groups Shouldering the Burden of Responsibility for Compensation Payments 

According to the the Nuclear Damage Compensation Act, the the operator of the nuclear power plant—TEPCO, in the case of Fukushima—is the sole entity responsible for the damages having a reasonable causal relationship to the nuclear accident (Nuclear Damage Compensation Act Article 3.1). However, as the total amount of compensation vastly exceeds the ability of TEPCO to pay, the Nuclear Damage Compensation Facilitation Corporation Act was passed in August 2011, based on the Act mentioned above (Nuclear Damage Compensation Act Article 16.1 and 16.2). To this end, the Japanese government is providing large amounts of needed compensation funds for compensation payments through this corporation.

#### Procedures to Pursue Responsibility (Legal Processes up to the Payment of Compensation)

Mandatory evacuees’ means of pursuing TEPCO’s responsibility is generally classified into the three types appearing below, and victims are able to choose from among these options. The first is as Direct Claims. The process starts with the victim directly submitting a claim for compensation to TEPCO, who distributes compensation payments in line with the guidelines stipulated by the above-mentioned Dispute Reconciliation Committee. TEPCO allocates the work of making the compensation payments to a large number of employees.

The second option is through the Nuclear Damage Compensation Dispute Resolution Center. In the case of victims’ direct claims, the situation often arises in which the victim and TEPCO do not reach consensus regarding the amount of compensation. The Nuclear Damage Compensation Dispute Resolution Center was created under the auspices of the Reconciliation Committee to handle such disputes involving claims for compensation, and is charged with managing settlement mediation. The Center is a specially created mediation and conciliation agency for dispute settlements outside the judicial system, and it employs several hundred lawyers as its mediators or investigators. They quickly review the details of victims’ applications to TEPCO and propose a settlement appropriate for both parties with the aim of resolving disputes quickly. At first, TEPCO accepted all of the Center’s settlement proposals. Since spring 2014, however, and especially in cases of larger-scale applications, there was a shift to a stance of ignoring settlement proposals and the Center’s dispute resolution capability declined.

The third option is Civil Action. Both the direct claim route and the mediation and conciliation route by the Center provide a simplified method for damage compensation, but when TEPCO denies them to the bitter end, the victims are left with no choice but to take legal action for their compensation claims. In all regions across Japan, a considerable number of the victims have taken their cases to court. By December 2013, it had already reached just under 7,000 plaintiffs in 16 prefectures, including Fukushima Prefecture, and several judgements have aleady been made. All of the victims in these lawsuits are making claims for amounts that greatly surpass those specified in the Interim Guidelines, etc. However, most judgements to date were negative as to the large increase in the amount of compensation from the criteria in the Guidelines.

#### Damages That Can’t be Calculated in Terms of Compensation

Excluding negligence on the part of TEPCO, compensation claims are made based on tort law for compensation for damages caused by illegal acts. Because of this, some of the damages (for example, the destruction of communities) cannot be fully calculated at face value. Also, even when they are, the way they are ascertained might not be appropriate, resulting in a portion of damages that cannot be fully comprehended.

#### Other Issues

The legal principle of damage compensation based on tort law is generally effective for handling individual damage such as traffic accidents. However, unlike cases where damage occurs only to a specific individual or a part of society, nuclear damage is spread across a region covering the entire area. For this reason, it is not appropriate to rely solely on damage compensation to individuals as a means to recover from the damage. Damage incurred by individuals must definitely be compensated but compensation payments bring about new problems and suffering. For example, the town of Namie was classified into three zones (a zone in preparation for the lifting of evacuation orders, a restricted residential zone, and a difficult-to-return zone) based on the intensity of the radiation dose received. The property-related/mental anguish damage compensation criteria vary zone-to-zone.

The extent of contamination from radioactive material is not spread uniformly within each zone but is non-uniform. As such, it is not necessarily the case that all locations within the difficult-to-return zone exhibit higher levels of radiation than do restricted residential zones; subjective and discretionary factors are probably inherent in drawing such zoning lines. However, if and when a zone is classified as difficult-to-return, the victims in that zone will certainly enjoy higher compensation than do the victims in the restricted residential zone. This demarcation will have an effect of breaking down the local community in Namie and will likely hinder reconstruction from the nuclear accident.

**Case Study Reports of Nuclear Damage (2)**

**Voluntary Evacuees**

_Yuki Ashina, Attorney, Shizuoka Bar Association_

I will analyze the nature of damages incurred by “voluntary evacuees” and their compensation. First, “voluntary evacuees” means the people who evacuated based on their own decisions from the areas where the Japanese government did not order evacuations because the total amount of radiation exposure in the area was assumed to be less than 20 millisieverts per year. They are also called “the evacuees from out of the ordered area.” The areas where voluntary evacuees originally lived encompass not only Fukushima Prefectures but also Northern Kanto and Metropolitan areas in Japan. The areas where they evacuated to ranged all over Japan.

There are many people who evacuated from the originally ordered evacuation areas who have remained evacuated even after the evacuation orders were lifted, and they can be included in the “voluntary evacuees.” However, I want to focus on the people who evacuated from the areas that were not originally ordered to evacuate. There are no official statistics about the accurate number of these voluntary evacuees because they are not recognized as official evacuees by Japanese government. However, the number was assumed to be about 40,000 in September 2011 according to the website of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.[^5] It can be assumed there are still many voluntary evacuees even now (January 2020).

One of the most unique points for voluntary evacuees is that most of them took their infant or school-aged children with them during evacuation. This is because the main reason they decided to evacuate was to avoid low-level radiation exposure that may cause harmful hearth effects several decades later. It is also characteristic of many voluntary evacuee families that they were composed of only mothers and children because most fathers found it necessary to remain and continue working in order to keep their family income.

#### Compensation

Though voluntary evacuees were not recognized as needing compensation, the fourth interim standard announced December 2011 stipulated that they would be paid the money detailed below. The fact that there were some geographic areas outside the mandatory evacuation zone in which the radiation level was actually quite high made this possible. In addition, a conference held to determine the standard of compensation in Fukushima accident that including some voluntary evacuees’ appeals regarding their disastrous situations also promoted their need for compensation. TEPCO complied and paid compensation as follows:

1.  Children under eighteen and pregnant women in specific areas would receive 680,000 yen per person for mental suffering.

2.  Adults except pregnant women would receive 80,000 yen for mental damage and 40,000 yen for incidental expenses, totalling 120,000 yen.

In addition to this compensation, some voluntary evacuees were able to receive extra compensation for evacuation expenses or rental fees for residence to live in during evacuation through using alternative dispute resolution (ADR) held by the Nuclear Damage Compensation Dispute Resolution Center. However, those who were eligible to receive extra compensation lived in limited specific areas such as Yamagata prefecture and Niigata prefecture where specialized attorneys could support them.

Despite these compensation options, the relief policy for voluntary evacuees is not adequate for several reasons. First, eligible areas were limited to certain, partial areas (Fukushima City, Koriyama City, Soma, city and so on) despite evacuees having moved from various areas. Second, the amount of money they received is much less than what mandatory evacuees received, even though voluntary evacuees also spent huge amounts of money to evacuate (as discussed further later). Lastly, though there was a system to provide all evacuees residences with money for rent through the local governments based on the Disaster Relief Act, the free rent policy was terminated in March 2017.

#### Damages of Voluntary Evacuees

*Financial Hardship*

The distinguishing characteristic of the damages of voluntary evacuees was that most of them had to pay for living fees in their original households and their evacuated households, in addition to expenses for transportation, furniture, and daily living fees that mandatory evacuees also incurred. Unlike mandatory evacuees, however, voluntary evacuees did not receive damages for lost earnings or monthly compensation for mental suffering caused by evacuation. They could only receive the one-time allowance mentioned above, and thus many voluntary evacuees chose to divide their households to secure their living fees. In a typical case, one parent remained in Fukushima to continue their job and maintain (to some extent) the family’s income and the other parent (in many cases, the mother) evacuated with their children. Many voluntary evacuees subsequently fell into financial hardship.

*High Anxiety Over Losing Residences*

As the policy of lending rent money was supposed to be reviewed once a year based on the Disaster Relief Act, a number of voluntary evacuees had high anxiety about how long the evacuation would last and when they would be able to return to their residences. According to the 91 free telephone consultation the Kanto Bar Association held in July 2016, almost half of the evacuees had concerns about their residence.

*Concerns about the Destruction of the Community*

Voluntary evacuees have two kinds of unique concerns about the collapse of their communities, which are distinct from the concerns shared with mandatory evacuees. Their first unique concern is the conflict between the people who chose to stay in their original residences and those who were forced to choose to say. Some voluntary evacuees feel guilty about their decision to leave their hometown. At the same time, those who could not or did not evacuate tend to blame the voluntary evacuees for causing an overall loss of trust in the safety in their areas. Those who did not evacuate were afraid that the existence of voluntary evacuees spread a negative image that the areas were too risky to continue to live in. The second unique concern is a conflict between voluntary evacuees and the mandatory evacuees. Some mandatory evacuees who have no place to return to, despite their eagerness to return, feel resentment for voluntary evacuees’ decisions not to return, even though they have places to live in. Overall, many voluntary evacuees feel isolated because it is difficult for them to find peers to share their worries with both in their original communities and in the new communities they evacuated to.

*Separation of Families*

As mentioned before, one of the unique characteristics of voluntary evacuation is that there are many cases of family separation. Some relationships between husbands and wives or between parents and children were destroyed during the long evacuation. Many couples reached the decision to divorce. Above all, these kinds of damages cannot be solved through temporary and limited compensation or through the unstable provision of residences.

#### The Newly Established Law

The essential concern of voluntary evacuees is that they are not officially treated as “victims” of the nuclear power plant accident. Indeed, they did not evacuate following the order of the Japanese government. However, it is also certain that they would have never chosen to evacuate had there not been an accident. Therefore, precluding them from the status of “victims” is not consistent with their actual situation. Voluntary evacuees largely decided to evacuate with the motivation of avoiding low-level radiation exposure, a reasonable decision given the uncertainties surrounding low level radiation exposure.

Under these circumstances, the new law, the “Act on Promotion of Support Measures for Lives of Disaster Victims to Protect and Support Children and Other Residents Suffering Damage due to Tokyo Electric Power Company’s Nuclear Accident” was made in June 2017. This law guarantees the right for each victim to choose between residing in their original location, relocating, or returning (Article 2). It also stipulates that the government shall make the utmost effort to eliminate any health concerns regarding external and internal exposure to radiation (Article 3) and to take responsibility for supporting evacuees in securing housing, finding employment, and children’s education. Thus this new law was expected to give voluntary evacuees rights as victims of the accident.

However, the Basic Framework (Article 5) for policies to make each Article concrete was not decided for more than a year after the law was made. Though the Basic Framework was eventually announced in October 2013, the contents of the Framework were ultimately disappointing to voluntary evacuees because they limited the areas eligible for support to only 33 municipalities in the middle and costal areas within Fukushima prefecture. Further, there were few concrete policies to carry out the law.

In summary, there are only weak measures for voluntary evacuees as regards to both compensation and supporting policies so far.

**Case Study Reports of Nuclear Damage (3)**

**The Case of the Farmers Affiliated with the Fukushima-ken Nouminren (Fukushima Prefecture Farmers Group)**

_Nobuyo Fujinaga, Osaka City Residents Network_

#### Economic Damages Suffered by Victims

The Fukushima-ken Nouminren (Fukushima Prefecture Farmers Group) includes both those affiliated and not affiliated with the Japan Agricultural Cooperatives (hereafter referred to as JA). The farmers in this Group are working together to realize various demands, including satisfactory damage compensation, which they have successfully secured.

The fundamental stance of the Farmer’s Group is the following:

1.  When delegating, the degree of one’s own sustained damage, and when or how much is to be paid, will not be completely known. Damages will vary by individual. When confronting TEPCO, the victim should first confirm the amount of one’s own damage, become convinced of the validity of one’s position, and finally make self-determination.

2.  Instead of the claim documentation requested by TEPCO, the victim should make TEPCO recognize the damages as a human rights issue. We will negotiate everything individually. Damage to agricultural products is not financial damage caused by misinformation or harmful rumors, but is actual damage.

In Fukushima, cultivated land area and commercial farms have both shown a notable decrease of -26% compared to the pre-accident year of 2010, and this rate of decrease is much higher than the nationwide loss of -19%. Commercial farms, in particular, shrunk by 18,000 units, and the reduction was quite remarkable in the Hamadori District evacuation zones. Aging of the population has progressed, and the use and maintenance of farm lots are reaching their limits. Production output of agricultural products in 2013 165.6 million yen, which had stagnated at approximately 80% of the 2009 pre-accident level. Other impacts on the market are found in a fear of “Fukushima-grown products,” and consequent price reductions.

#### Issues with the Restoration Policies of the Government, Decontamination Effects and Compensation

*Rice Paddies*

In 2011, the year of the accident, some brown rice harvest products exceeding 500 bq/kg, the radiation cutoff criterion at the time, were detected and their shipments suspended. Since 2011, measures to control cesium absorption were carried out using zeolite and potassium spraying onto the fields. Brown rice that exceeds 100 bq/kg of radiation, detected by whole bag inspection, cannot be distributed.

*Orchards*

In the winter of 2012, the trunks and branches of peach, apple, persimmon, and grape vines/trees were high-pressure washed to decontaminate them. Pear tree barks were scraped for decontamination. From 2014, for the farms who wished, measures to strip away the topsoil from groves, orchards, fields, etc. and transfer it to a corner of the farmland for decontamination have been carried out. As a consequence, the radiation doses did fall, but there was no compensation for declines in crop yields due to the stripping of the all-important topsoil or its effect on the fruit trees.

*Pastures*

Absorption control methods were conducted by spraying/sprinkling potassium simultaneously with deep plowing as well as tilling using a plow and stripping the topsoil. Starting in 2015, cattle were allowed to graze once radiation analyses of the grass in the pastures showed lower than standard values. However, there are still concerns about cesium uptake. For that reason, dairy farmers do not feed their animals using just their own in-house produced grass feed, but augment with purchased feed. There is no compensation for this purchased livestock feed, which is an increasing burden on the farmers. Zeolite and potassium for decontamination is distributed through local government channels and agricultural cooperatives, and expenditures are being allocated for compensation.

#### Damage Compensation (Funds Paid for Damages Suffered by Victims)

Each item that showed a clear causal relationship to the nuclear disaster was compared against a pre-accident criteria year, and if a difference in sales volume and/or unit price occurred, compensation will be awarded. However, immediately following the accident, TEPCO would change the method of payment, and the materials deemed necessary and not, at its discretion. This can be seen when the conventional natural increase in fruit (increases in yield due to the tree’s age) is not recognized and when compensation is delayed. As a result, Fukushima Prefecture farmers will lose their motivation to increase their production scale. There are many cases in which, although spinach bought at a farmer’s market was 100 yen both before and after the accident, there was a drop in the volume sold and the unit price saw no change, resulting in no compensation.

Following the accident, dairy farmers were no longer able to use in-house produced grass feed because of the radioactive contamination and had no choice but to quickly switch to store-bought feed. In the aftermath of the disaster, dairy cows began to die regularly after giving birth. There were some farmers who had six head of cattle die within six months but because a causal relationship to TEPCO was not found, there was no compensation. A claim for compensation for the decline in milk shipment was also lodged against TEPCO but no payments were made because the cause of the cow deaths could not be tied to the nuclear accident. Necessary additional expenses due to radiation testing and the accident are also being compensated.

Inspection of agricultural products is naturally compensated as an additional cost, but expenditures for soil analysis were not compensated. Much of the land in Fukushima Prefecture’s Hamadori and Nakadori districts exceeds 40,000 bq/m^2^. This figure shows that these districts fall under the radiation-controlled areas. Farmers asked the Ministry of the Environment, the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries if there were there any issues with farming work in these sites. For over two years they received no straightforward replies, with some responses along the lines of “since you are a self-employed person, there are no departments in charge for your case.” On the other hand, for laborers working in farming corporations, employers are required to carry out control measures such as radiation dose control and health diagnoses, etc., which is contradictory.

#### Damages That Can’t be Calculated in Terms of Compensation

Following the nuclear accident, newly determined criteria emerged requiring that there be no infringement of rights in areas measuring 20 mSv/year or less. These are government-mandated guideline, and form the largest basis for cutting Fukushima off from the rest of Japan. Outside Fukushima Prefecture, the general public’s annual dose limit is 1 mSv, the same as before the accident. Considering that it is an emergency dose limit, 20 mSv is grounds for suffering, grounds for evacuation, and grounds for compensation. The recall of the criterion of 20 mSv is important for the recovery of Fukushima.

In the Farmers Group, the members’ farmlands are measured and informed of the radiation dose in becquerels (Bq) as much as possible. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries measures the air radiation dose rate (in Sievert) via aerial monitoring (2 km in all directions). However, the farmers work the land itself, touching the soil and sometimes even inhale its dust—radiation exposure is often particularly high in orchards since no tillage is done. They have subsequently been requesting that, rather than the air radiation dose rate, the radiation dose (in becquerels) should be used to measure and inform the public. The circumstances force Fukushima farmers to labor in this disadvantaged areas, and they are left with no choice but to risk exposure. They are demanding in the neighborhood of 30,000 yen per decare as damage compensation to continue farm work in contaminated farmlands in the disadvantaged areas, but this has not come to fruition.

#### Responsibility (People and Groups Shouldering the Burden of Responsibility for Compensation Payments)

Fukushima-grown produce is bought at a low price because of the actual damage incurred by the nuclear accident and the radioactive substances released by it. Most radioactive substances in harvested agricultural products are below the reference value or under test detection limits, but the farmlands are truly contaminated with radioactive substances. However, one must not forget about the damage that rumors and misinformation can cause farmers in a region where there is no prospect for controlling the nuclear accident fallout or decommissioning the nuclear reactor itself. The responsibility for compensating rumours should not be passed on to the consumer, whose monetary support could benefit farmers. The responsibility for the damage lies with TEPCO, who caused the accident, and the government that promoted nuclear power in the first place.

#### Future Oriented Farmland Utilization: Toward Renewable Energy Endeavors

2012 saw the start of the renewable energy buyout guarantee scheme/FIT. Farmers also are attempting to abandon nuclear power generation and self-produce the energy they need. At the same time, to stabilize farm management, plans of establishing solar power generation in farms are moving forward. Regional energy sources for local city residents and farmers to use are now indispensable for the sake of energy independence, intra-regional circulation of money, and the maintenance and development of local communities. Citizen-funded power plants have been built in Ryouzenmachi in Date City at 50 kW, and in Atami-cho in Koriyama City at 210 kW. Further, corporations that generate power are being launched in various localities, promoting solar power generation. Farmer members will make use of idle land, incorporate planning, and set up a plant with an installed capacity of 6M. Moreover, through anaerobic fermentation of food residue and organic sludge, livestock manure, as well as energy crops, they aim to create a power plant that utilizes methane gas.

                                 Units              Fukushima Prefecture   Nationwide                                               
  ------------------------------ ------------------ ---------------------- ------------ ---------------- -------------------------- --------------------
                                                    2015 A                 2010 B       Change C (A-B)   Rate of Change (%) (C/B)   Rate of Change (%)
  **Agriculture & Forestry**     \# of Businesses   53,623                 72,604       18,981           26.1                       18.7
  Agriculture                    \# of Businesses   53,157                 71,654       18,497           25.8                       18
  Forestry                       \# of Businesses   2,721                  4,929        2,208            44.8                       37.7
  **Arable Land**                Hectares (ha)      100,279                121,488      21,209           17.5                       5
  Rice Paddies                   Hectares (ha)      77,283                 90,572       13,289           14.7                       4.8
  Fields                         Hectares (ha)      17,921                 25,057       7,136            28.5                       4.1
  Lumber/Forestry                Hectares (ha)      5,076                  5,859        783              13.4                       11.8
  **Abandoned Fields/Paddies**   Hectares (ha)      25,226                 22,394       2,832            12.6                       6.8
  **Professional Farmers**       Households         52,270                 70,520       18,250           25.9                       18.5
  Full-time Farmers              Households         12,078                 13,004       926              7.1                        1.9
  Part-time Farmers              Households         40,192                 57,516       17,324           30.1                       24.8

Agriculture output calculated (Unit: 100,000,000 yen)

                             **2009**   **2013**
  -------------------------- ---------- ----------
  **Rice**                   **928**    **754**
  **Vegetables**             **546**    **469**
  **Fruits**                 **272**    **245**
  **Cows raised for meat**   **137**    **108**
  **Raw milk**               **97**     **80**

### Investigating the Gap between Damage Compensation and Reconstruction of the Fishing Industry in Post-Disaster Fukushima: The Case of Soma City**

_Satsuki Takahashi, Faculty of Sustainability Studies, Hosei University_

#### Introduction

The Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident had a tremendous impact on coastal fishermen who make a living on the sea. Fishing operations have been suspended in the coastal waters of Fukushima since the accident, and despite conducting trial runs the situation is not looking brighter for a resumption of operations. The purpose of this paper is to examine the actual condition of the damages that cannot be captured simply by looking at the damage compensation, as well as the gap between damage compensation and the recovery of the fishing industry, based on interview surveys conducted among coastal fishermen from Soma City, Fukushima Prefecture in 2014.

#### The Case of Soma City, Fukushima Prefecture

Many of the families working in the coastal fisheries in Soma City, Fukushima Prefecture, lived in districts near the coastline. Thus, most lost their homes in the giant tsunami of 2011, and many people lost their families. Coastal Fisherman A was one of those living in this coastal region. Luckily, his family evacuated to high ground after the earthquake, so everyone was safe—but his home, which he was so fond of, was swept away, leaving only the foundation. Starting immediately after the tsunami and for the next two months, Mr. A and his family lived as evacuees, relocating to temporary housing. At the time of the interview in 2014, he was still living in the same place with his wife. Plans were underway for a group transfer to a higher elevation for those who lived in districts near the coast, and within 3 years their new home would be finished. While Mr. A was happy that prospects were looking up for the reconstruction of his family home, he did not hold the same optimism for the prospects of reconstructing the fishing industry, so he had deep anxiety about the future.

In 2011, on the afternoon of the earthquake, after they took in the last catch of the day, Mr. A and his wife were resting at home. Right when the large quake had settled down, Mr. A’s wife headed toward the designated evacuation site on high ground and Mr. A. returned to the harbor to take the boat offshore. When a large earthquake occurs, generations of fishermen in this region have a practice of taking their boats out to the open sea before the tsunami makes landfall. This was customary to protect the boat, which is the fisherman’s indispensible possession, and many of the fishing boats, including Mr. A’s, remained unscathed.

Risking his life in this way protected the fishing boat. However, since the ban on fishing continues to this day due to the radioactive contamination from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident, most boats have spent their time since the earthquake moored in the harbor. At the time of this report nine years have passed since the earthquake and the result of regular monitoring tests has shown a downward trend on the measured dosages of radioactive substances detected from the bodies of fish and other seafood. Starting June 2012, continuous trial operations have been conducted targeting fish species in which radioactive substances are continuously not detected, and assessment surveys at shipment destinations of Fukushima Prefecture-caught seafood are being conducted. Furthermore, the number of species targeted by the trial operations has increased dramatically from the initial three species. According the Fukushima Prefectural Federation of Fisheries Cooperative Associations, as of February 20, 2020, 228 species of marine life tested safe for consumption.[^6] However, consumer evaluations of Fukushima-caught seafood are still severe. Even when it has been established by monitoring results that there is no radiation effect, one can predict that it will be many years before consumer anxiety about Fukushima-caught seafood will ease up.

For the nine years since the earthquake, the coastal region’s fishermen have spent their time mostly on activities other than fishing. Although they received compensation for the tsunami and nuclear accident-related damages, these funds have been exhausted by the rebuilding of homes, re-purchasing of fishing gear, and the maintenance of the fishing boats saved by putting them offshore, etc. Because of this, many fishermen are working at reconstruction-related sites as day labor. Some of these individuals have expressed concerns about their identity as fishermen. Hardly any have been on a boat in the long years since the earthquake, and as they spend their days at construction sites without knowing when they can get back to fishing again, days of frustration are spent wondering if they will be able to return to their true calling. If only the nuclear accident had not happened, the rebuilding of the fishing industry would have occurred much more rapidly. However, the discharge of contaminated water out into the ocean continues even today in Fukushima, and the concerns about the future held by these fishermen who have lived in harmony with the sea are indeed great.

For Mr. A, who has been unable to return to his true calling as a fisherman, finding himself powerless was like a battle with himself. Ever since May 2011, when he started living in the temporary housing, he has been working on construction sites. As he patted his wheat-colored cheeks, Mr. A. said, “Only my skin color is the same as when I was fishing, lightly darkened by the sun,” as a self-deprecating smile rose to his face. “However, before when I was working as a fisherman on the ocean, the condition of my body was completely different. Even though I am a fisherman, I am wearing the temporary mask of a construction worker. I wonder if the day will ever come when I can get back to fishing? I might not be able to end my days as a fisherman,” he said sadly. As of the time of the interview-based survey, in the summer of 2014, Mr. A. had not stepped onto a fishing boat even once since the earthquake. Trial runs have begun on several types of marine life and he had friends who once or twice a month get on a fishing boat and catch fish. But because flounder, Mr. A’s specialty, had not been entered into the list of species targeted in the trial operation, he has not even been able to do the trial runs. When the topic of the effect of the nuclear accident was raised, the struggle related to identity described above is not well reflected in the support proffered by compensation funds.

While the fishermen do anticipate the eventual reopening of fishing waters, the future that follows these operations nevertheless is clouded in uncertainty. Because TEPCO wishes to end its responsibility for compensation soon, it wants these operations to start as early as possible. The fishermen themselves are hoping for the fishing industry to be put back into gear. At the same time, however, consumer anxieties about Fukushima-caught seafood are such that even if these operations start up again, there is no guarantee that the fish will sell, and deep anxieties remain about whether fishing operations are economically viable. If it turns out that the market price for fish when fishing operations open in the future is far lower than that before the earthquake, the fishermen will have to make a claim to TEPCO based on damage by false rumors and misinformation, but in the end exactly how much TEPCO will consent to pay out is very much up in the air.

#### Damage Compensation in the Coastal Fishing Industry

Following the nuclear accident, high concentrations of radioactive substances were detected in marine life whose habitat was the surrounding coastal waters and, starting immediately after the accident, fishing operations were suspended in all Fukushima prefecture waters. Trial operations are being done at present, though actual fishing operations are not yet set. For this reason, damage compensation is being paid by TEPCO for damages caused by the suspension of operation. As of December 2016, the operational suspension status continues, and compensation payments are also continuing.

Compensation funding negotiations for damages received by coastal fishermen are conducted principally through fishery cooperatives (hereafter referred to as fish coops). In Fukushima Prefecture there is a federate union of fish coops. The federate union hires attorneys to conduct compensation negotiations, so that fishermen are not able to involve themselves at the individual personal level for compensation negotiations. However, to get compensation funds, fishermen are required to have detailed catch records for the last five years and compensation claims are made based on these records. The rough calculation of compensation is made as follows. First, the years with the highest and lowest hauls are taken out from the past five years’ catch records, and the remaining three years’ average amount of haul is calculated. This then dictates the amount of damage compensation due to the suspension of fishery operation, and TEPCO will be requested to pay this amount.

In this way, when one looks only at the conditions of compensation for the economic damage accompanying suspension of operations, one may be forgiven for thinking that the fishermen are receiving appropriate compensation. However, in the end, is it possible to comprehend damages only in terms of economic damage? The loss of the victim’s identity as a fisherman, and the anxiety regarding the re-birth of the fishing industry mentioned by Mr. A are not generally categorized as damage. However, the effects of a nuclear accident are often hard to calculate numerically. We should take clear note of the fact that the opportunity to land hauls of fish was not the only thing that was taken away from fishermen by the nuclear accident.

#### Reconstruction of the Fishing Industry

As with the recent Great East Japan Earthquake, following the disaster, society understood the word “responsibility” to mean “compensation responsibility,” and things were often handled that way. However, this blurs the lines of responsibility for damage that does not fit into the compensation schemes currently in play, and there is even a danger of twisting the meaning of reconstruction. Reconstruction of the fishing industry is not finished once trial operations have segued into real operations, in the same way that lifting the evacuation orders does not automatically mean reconstruction is complete for an area. Also, the responsibility that should be borne for evacuees and fishermen by TEPCO, who caused the accident, and the state government that actively promoted policies of nuclear power, does not disappear simply because regular fishing operations resume and evacuation orders are lifted. Isn’t their guaranteed responsibility not just for damage compensation, but also for reconstruction?

What is reconstruction, then? When I posed this question to Mr. A in the summer of 2014, he answered, “I can’t even imagine reconstruction right now.” As Mr. A put it, “If the prospect of actual fishing operations is no good, then nothing will get off the ground at all. If the prospects for actual fishing operations are good, then maybe we can start to think about reconstruction.” In other words, reconstruction to him means following a return to regular fishing operations, a process that finally gets started further on down the road from that. Just as we can see from looking at past case studies of nuclear weapons testing in the Marshall Islands and the Chernobyl Nuclear Accident, the time necessary to recover from radioactive contamination is quite long. With recovery comes many difficult things. In spite of that fact, accident responsibility is often understood as compensation responsibility—and we wonder why those who are responsible are trying to relinquish their responsibility in less time than the period actually needed for recovery.

Many people involved with reconstruction policy will tell you that reconstruction is not a return to the state before the earthquake. If that is true, shouldn’t responsibility for the nuclear accident be regarded in the same way? For that which was taken from victims, merely going back in time to provide compensation does not count as fulfilling responsibility. Responsibility is not just about the past—shouldn’t we be thinking about the present and the future as well?

## Section III

### Issues with the Compensation Scheme for Nuclear Accident Victims From Discussions in Japan after the Fukushima Accident

_Takao Suami, Waseda University, Graduate School of Law_

#### Introduction

Following the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Plant Accident, compensation was given to all those who suffered injury and damage due to the accident. First and foremost, this included the many residents who had no choice but to undergo mandatory evacuation, and also a large number of individuals and business people. In this paper, we give an overview of the kind of issues that were discussed in Japan after the accident of March 2011 with regards to compensation to the victims with an aim of obtaining suggestions in our quest for an appropriate compensation system.

#### Disaster Reconstruction and Compensation for Damages

*The Limits of Damage Relief by Compensation*

In Japan, nine years have passed since the accident, so the limits and insufficiency of victim aid through the damage compensation system are starting to be recognized. As of January 10, 2020, TEPCO secured governmental support and an enormous amount of compensation (approximately 9.31576 trillion yen) were paid to a large number of victims (approximately 1,111,000 mandatory evacuees, and 1,308,000 voluntary evacuees, and 505,000 corporations and individual business people). However, in actuality, there is a portion of compensation payments that are not directly linked to life recovery/regional reconstruction, and the appropriateness of victim aid that centers around damage compensation is being called into question.

*The Harm Inherent in Damage Compensation*

Of course, the principle of “perfect compensation for damages” must be clung to. A victim’s ability to make a claim to the injurer for compensation is the right of the injured, and the blurring of this principle necessarily makes calculation of the cost of nuclear power generation inaccurate and side-tracks the discussion surrounding which nuclear policy to follow. Compensation payments have created the following divisions among victims of the earthquake and the nuclear accident in relation to the applied criteria for compensation. These is a) the division between earthquake/tsunami victims and nuclear accident victims, b) the division between mandatory and voluntary evacuees, and c) the classification of residence among mandatory evacuees (zones in preparation for the lifting of the evacuation orders, restricted residential zones, and difficult-to-return zones). The presence or absence of legal effects are decided upon depending on whether or not certain requirements are fulfilled. This is an essential attribute of contemporary law, and is usually understood as a natural phenomenon. However, especially under the circumstances that accompany mandatory evacuation which damage the local community on all fronts, the current compensation system has the effect of anchoring such damage and making it more severe.

*Compensation Payments and Reconstruction of Livelihoods*

In addition, although compensation payments are substantial for mandatory evacuees, they do not always contribute directly to the reconstruction of their livelihoods. The intent of the damage compensation system is that the victims would be able to start a new life by receiving compensation for the damages they have sustained, thus restoring their lives to the pre-disaster state. For the victims of the Fukushima nuclear accident, however, the compensation that is paid to them may be enough for day-to-day living but it is not enough to overcome the obstacles to reconstructing a new life. As a result, many of the victims are still without a clear plan for rebuilding their lives. For example, fishermen are unable to resume their normal operations due to radioactive contamination of the ocean from the nuclear accident. The circumstances surrounding the farmers have not improved either, as consumers are avoiding the purchase of produce from Fukushima out of concern for the radioactively contaminated soil, and the prices of overall products from Fukushima have dwindled. Furthermore, elders who were forced to leave their hometown are having difficulties adjusting to the new environment, which leaves them isolated. Children who had to move to another prefecture are often targeted for bullying at their new schools. Although the fact that the compensation for damages does not necessarily result in rebuilding of the livelihoods is an inherent limitation in tort law for damage compensation, this limitation is even more real and prominent in the case of nuclear disasters in which the foundation of local communities and local industries have been wholly destroyed.

*Emergence of New Damages Associated with the Victims Returning Home*

It is natural to assume that the compensation process would approach its end as compensation is paid out to the victims. The evacuation orders in some of the forced evacuation areas have been lifted and some of the residents have already returned. However, it has been reported that some business owners ran into financial difficulties after they returned home and resumed their businesses, representing just one of the obstacle facing evacuees and reconstructing the local community. In these cases, TEPCO claims that the compensation has already been completed and that there is no causation between these difficulties and the nuclear accident, but in reality, the causation cannot be categorically denied. By March 2017, most evacuation orders were lifted, except for the “difficult-to-return zones” in which evacuees are unable to return for the foreseeable future due to high-dose radiation. In light of this, claims for damage compensation are likely to continue for the near future. In 2013, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) estimated the total amount of compensation at 5.4 trillion yen but, as mentioned earlier, close to 6.5 trillion yen had already been paid by 2016, far exceeding the initial estimate. According to the new estimate in December 2016, therefore, the total amount of compensation would balloon to 8 trillion yen. Even then, it was still unclear as to whether or not this amount would fully cover the compensation. As mentioned before, more than 9.3 trillion yen has been paid up to now. In essence, with the circumstances still in flux, what were formerly potential damages are revealing themselves to be actual damages, and therefore it is not clear when the compensation payments will be completed.

*Limitations of the “Compensation for Damage” Framework*

In general, for a disaster such as the nuclear disaster in which the entire region has been affected, a system of paying compensation only to individual victims is simply inadequate. This is because the sum of damages sustained by each individual victim still does not reflect the various damages that were sustained by the community as a whole. In addition to reconsidering how the damage compensation system is structured, it is also necessary to consider a separate system that could complement the compensation system.

#### Discussions in Japan after the Fukushima Accident

In this section, I will organize the issues that have been debated in Japan since the nuclear accident and provide concise explanations of them.

*Compensation for Damages vs. Compensation for Losses*

In the case of the Fukushima nuclear power plant accident, since the effort to provide relief to the victims has been made in accordance with the Act on Compensation for Nuclear Damages, it is irrefutable that payments made so far to the victims have been compensation for damages. However, it is theoretically possible to perceive the compensation as that for losses, rather than compensation for damages, in terms of restrictions on property rights by public welfare (Article 29-3 of the constitution), which is particularly the case for the mandatory evacuees. This is because residents were forced to evacuate based on the evacuation order zones that were established by the government. Japanese law adopts the principle of “actual loss compensation” (resulting in the denial of punitive damages) and it is therefore difficult to be compensated for more than the objective value of the assets. On the other hand, some view that compensation for losses should also take survival security and livelihood protection into consideration, which can potentially allow for a more flexible calculation of the amount of payment. Having said that, in the case of the nuclear disaster in Fukushima, although the compensation is for damages, payments in amounts exceeding the objective damages have been approved. For example, since the prices of real estate are generally higher in areas where the evacuees are resettling compared to the prices in the evacuated zones, the amounts are determined by considering the additional cost that would be required for securing new real estate property. This fact in itself suggests that there is a limitation to the existing compensation system.

*Structure of the Damage Compensation System*

The major issues that have been debated regarding the damage compensation system are as follows:

**Scope of victims**

It is natural that mandatory evacuees are considered victims of the nuclear accident, but when it comes to the voluntary evacuees, i.e., those who evacuated from areas for which an evacuation order was not issued, the damages they have sustained and their connection to the nuclear accident is a point of contention. This is because their decisions to evacuate were voluntary in one sense, even if in reality they had no alternative but to evacuate. For this reason, the amount of damage compensation that has been paid to voluntary evacuees is significantly less than that paid to mandatory evacuees, and the scope of voluntary evacuees who are eligible for compensation is limited to those who were residents of Fukushima at the time of the accident. This means that the status of voluntary evacuees as victims is not fully recognized.

Victims are not limited to those who were forced to evacuate. Many business owners, both from within and outside the evacuated zones, have experienced financial damages from business interruption and reduced sales after resuming their businesses. Determining which business owners qualify as victims is particularly problematic when the damages are reputation damages (or damage from harmful rumors or misinformation, described further below).

Each local government in the evacuated zones is also a victim on its own, independent of its residents. This is because not only has it been forced to cover various expenses for the nuclear accident but also because the municipal properties have also been damaged. Having said that, these local governments have received financial support from the central government. The issue to be discussed is in regards to how this financial support should be evaluated in relation to the damages.

**Scope of damages and calculation of the amount of compensation**

According to Japanese laws, damages that are related to the accident are eligible for compensation, which include economic damages (property, income) and mental anguish damages (consolation). For the former, “reputation damage” became a point of contention. Reputation damage was recognized in precedents but a wide range of reputation damages that would have been considered far out of scope according to conventional criteria have been included for compensation, such as the lower prices of agricultural and fishery products across Japan (i.e., not just in Fukushima). For example, based on the supplement to the intermediary guidelines, mushrooms that were produced 800 km away in Hiroshima are also considered to have sustained reputation damage.

As for the latter, determination of the “base amount for mental anguish damages” for the mandatory evacuees was debated in particular. Starting with the sudden evacuation order, mandatory evacuees had to endure poor living conditions for a long time. The residents of difficult-to-return zones do not even know when they will be able to go home, which means that they have practically lost their hometown for good. For residents of zones prepared for evacuation orders to be lifted and in restricted residence areas, even if they are able to return, their hometowns are far cry from what they remember. It is likely that a very few will actually decide to return out of concern for low-dose exposure and deteriorated living infrastructure. Although there is no doubt that these circumstances are causing a great deal of extreme psychological pain, it is not easy to assess them in terms of monetary amount. In the case of the Fukushima nuclear disaster, the base amount for mental anguish damage was set to 100,000 yen per month by the Dispute Reconciliation Committee for Nuclear Damage Compensation—an amount that received strong criticism from victims. First of all, the compensation criteria were set based on inadequate investigation. For mental anguish damages in which objective justification of the calculated amount is difficult, a thorough survey of the actual conditions through victim-oriented interviews and the like lends credibility to the criteria. In other words, the opinions of the legal experts in the Committee alone are unable to substantiate the criteria.

Secondly, the rationale behind the compensation criteria are also important. The Committee explained that it decided the compensation criteria based on the criteria for traffic accidents. However, the mental anguish damages due to mandatory evacuation (separation of family members, reduced income, difficulties and anxiety of living as evacuees), anxiety and suffering (including the fear of radiation exposure and uncertainty of the future) are completely different from those caused by traffic accidents. It is not possible to simply adapt the traffic accident criteria to the situation of nuclear disaster. Third, the validity of the compensation criteria themselves is questionable. All of the lawsuits that were filed by victims across Japan have demanded much higher compensation, suggesting that many victims are not satisfied with the amounts that were set by the Committee. However, for mental anguish damages, the first and second points reflect the validity of the monetary amount.

**Subject of liability**

In Japan, only the nuclear operators (mainly electric power companies) are subject to liability in accordance with the Act on Compensation for Nuclear Damage, and they bear liability without fault. However, two issues have been debated since immediately after the accident. The first is whether or not the government, in addition to the nuclear operations, should be held liable. Many of the lawsuits that have been filed by the victims pursue not only TEPCO but also the liability of the government, because for all intents and purposes, nuclear power generation has been promoted as a government policy. The second issue, in relation to the first, is whether the liability of the nuclear operators is unlimited or limited. If the nuclear operators become bankrupt, their unlimited liability becomes virtually meaningless, and if we consider the fact that nuclear generation has always been a national policy, it can be argued that the liability borne by the nuclear operators should be limited and that the government should also be subject to liability. However, the idea of turning the nuclear operators’ liability from unlimited to limited has met strong opposition from the Japanese citizens as it will lessen the safety consciousness of the nuclear operators and cause a moral hazard. Ultimately, the Parliament decided to maintain that the nuclear operators continue to bear unlimited liability.

*Dispute Settlement Understanding*

With regard to the procedure for the victims to pursue TEPCO’s liability, the following two points have been argued. Firstly, the current Japanese proceedings for civil actions lack a system that can unify the demands made by multiple victims for damage compensations caused by unlawful acts, as happens in class action lawsuits in the US. This flaw is particularly serious when there are many cases in which a large number of victims have sustained damages of relatively small amount. After the Fukushima nuclear disaster, the Nuclear Dispute Resolution Center, which is an alternative dispute resolution (ADR) body, was established under the Dispute Reconciliation Committee for Nuclear Damage Compensation to resolve disputes concerning compensations between the victims and TEPCO. In the case of the town of Namie, the local government made a claim to the Center to increase the amount of compensation for mental anguish damages by by acting as a representative for over 15,000 town residents. Such a collective claim is a practical measure against the aforementioned flaw in the system.

Secondly, the ADR procedures are not effective. The service provided by the Dispute Resolution Center is not arbitration but mediation and conciliation. Initially, exercising a binding force on TEPCO alone with regard to the settlement proposals proposed by the Center was considered, but because TEPCO repeatedly claimed that it would sincerely accept the Center’s settlement proposals, the motion to enforce a one-sided binding force was denied. At the beginning, TEPCO accepted all settlement proposals from the Center. However, since the spring of 2014, TEPCO has refused to accept some settlement proposals, especially regarding mass claims such as the aforementioned claim by Namie town residents. Because of this issue, disputes have not been resolved in a timely manner for many of the victims.

#### Conclusion: A Desirable Compensation Scheme 

We believe that the main objective of the compensation scheme as it applies to the victims of the nuclear accident is recovery from the damages sustained by the victims. However, what the victims truly desire is restitution to the pre-accident state, and damage compensation is the last resort when other alternative measures have been insufficient to achieve such restitution. Restoration from the nuclear accident needs to involve reconstruction, in one form or another, of the victims’ local communities, which have been completely devastated. However, the current damage compensation system does not independently recognize the destruction of communities as damages. Although it is unclear as to whether or not such damages should be covered by damage compensation, the fact remains that a compensation system that is exclusively focused on the individual victims cannot reconstruct the local communities that have been destroyed as a whole, and therefore the lives of the victims that were built on the relationships with other people within the communities cannot be reconstructed, either.

In addition to recognizing that individual victims have sustained their own damages within the general context in which the local communities have been entirely destroyed, we believe that the experience of the Fukushima nuclear power plant disaster suggests that a compensation scheme that can contribute to the victims’ prospective lives is also needed.

### The Significance of “Injunction Lawsuit” Filed by Residents to Prevent Nuclear Disasters

_Nobuyo Fujinaga, (Osaka City Residents Network)_

On March 9, 2016, the Otsu District Court made a provisional injunction to order a “suspension in operation of the Takahama Nuclear Power Plant’s No. 3 and 4 nuclear reactors.”[^7] This ruling put an end to a 5-year-long court action that was started in August 2011 by the residents of Shiga prefecture, who refused to become the victims of severe nuclear damages. This ruling came along when nuclear power plants across Japan were resuming operation as exemplified by both the approval to resume operation of Sendai Nuclear Power Plant in Kagoshima prefecture and Fukui’s District Court’s decision to overturn the original ruling upon deliberation over the objection. Thus, this ruling is extremely significant as it puts a stop to the trend of resuming nuclear operations by suspending one that is currently in operation. It was also a major victory in a sense that it honored the personal rights of the residents, who wanted to suspend nuclear operation even by going to court, and there are no words to describe the joy it has brought. Since then, a stay of execution complaint by the Kansai Electric Power, the defendant, was denied on June 17 and KEPCO’s objection was denied on July 12. The lawsuits have now reached the Osaka High Court, where court deliberation has started.

The aforementioned lawsuit that was filed by the residents was based on their anger towards the ongoing trend of resuming nuclear operation when there are still 100,000 people who are unable to return home, and the cause and resolution of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster are still unclear, as well as the seriousness of the risk and accident potential for the Takahama Nuclear Power Plant’s No. 3 and 4 reactors that typify such trend. On April 16 and 17, 2016, an epicentral earthquake caused by an active fault occurred in the Kumamoto region, causing extensive damages. Since then, Mt. Aso has erupted and a fault-type epicentral earthquake caused significant damages in Tottori prefecture, affecting a wide area with seismic intensity of 4 along the entire Median Tectonic Line. Seismic intensity of grade 3 to 4 was also felt in Osaka. The area of Tsuruga in Fukui prefecture is known as the “Ginza of nuclear power plants” as it is home to 14 of the KEPCO’s plants, and it sits directly above a cluster of active faults known as the Kinki Triangle, of which the Median Tectonic Line forms the base. An accident at the Takahama and Ōi Nuclear Power Plants will contaminate Lake Biwa, which serves as the water source for 14 million residents in Kinki area who live within a 30 km radius, and the magnitude of such damage would be unimaginable.

The defense counsels summarized the reasons for the suspension ruling as below. The severe accident measures are inadequate. 700 Gal as the design basis earthquake ground motion is inadequate. There is a risk of major tsunami. The used fuel pit is not sufficiently safe. There are no effective evacuation plans. Based on these, the defense counsel clearly stated that: \[1\] the burden of proof has been placed on KEPCO; \[2\] the irrationality of the new regulatory standards have been clearly pointed out; and \[3\] whether or not the nuclear power plants should be approved is to be a social decision and not only an expert decision.

In addition, 1107 residents in the Kinki area filed a lawsuit to suspend the operation of Ōi Nuclear Power Plant’s No. 1 to 4 nuclear reactors on November 29, 2011. Preparation is underway for additional lawsuits with the aim to have 10,000 plaintiffs for the second through fifth campaigns.

### What the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Accident Robbed: Exploring the Limitations and Potentials of the Compensation Payment System

_Takao Suami, Waseda Law School_

_Yuki Ashina, Attorney-at-law, Shizuoka Bar Association_

_Satsuki Takahashi, Faculty of Sustainability Studies, Hosei University_

#### Introduction

After the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident (hereafter referred as the Fukushima nuclear accident), compensation payments have been made in Japan to many residents who were forced to evacuate, as well as to many individuals and businesses that were affected by the accident. In this section, we will examine various issues that have been discussed domestically with regards to nuclear power plant accident compensation since the accident in March 201. We aim to understand what compensation payments were made to victims of the nuclear accident for what types of damages and under what compensation system, with the objective of drawing out suggestions for a better nuclear power plant accident compensation scheme.

We will first clarify the place of the problem of compensation within the framework of victims’ relief and discuss the limitations of the damage compensation scheme that have been revealed through the experience of the Fukushima nuclear accident. Next, as topics for further discussion on the damage compensation system, we will illustrate difficulties in determining the definition of, and the range of, "victims." Then we will examine the extent to which the damage compensation scheme contributes to recovery from a nuclear power plant accident in which damages are continuously generated for an extended period of time. And lastly, based on experiences from the Fukushima nuclear accident, we will propose ideas for systems for compensation payment that are needed for the future, and regulations for establishing such systems. Meridian 180 has discussed many critical issues in the past. They include: ‘Who is classified as a victim?’ ‘What counts as damage?’ ‘What happens when compensation does not permit for total recovery of a person or community?’ ‘Who is responsible for compensation?’ And ‘What is considered as recovery?’ This paper represents our answers to these questions that were obtained through repeated discussions based on experience from the Fukushima nuclear accident. It is our hope that this paper can stimulate a discourse on how we should deal with nuclear accidents that will probably occur again somewhere in the world.

#### Compensation Issues Within Victims’ Relief

The objective of victims’ relief is to recover the serious damages inflicted by the Fukushima nuclear accident, to rebuild their lives, and regain the peaceful daily lives of before the accident. This objective itself is thought to be widely shared in Japan, and victims’ relief of the Fukushima nuclear accident has primarily revolved around compensation payment against nuclear damages. The total amount of compensation paid as of the end of June 2017 to individuals and corporations amounts to approximately 7.4673 trillion yen (about 9.3157 trillion yen as of January 2020), and in order to complete the payment process for such a large amount of compensation, Tokyo Electric Power Company assigned about 5,040 staff (as of July 1, 2017) to the Fukushima Nuclear Power Compensation Consultation Room at their Fukushima Headquarters, handling the payment matters. Payment of compensation is still ongoing as of this writing.[^8] However, latent damages continue to surface as situations change, making it impossible to predict when the payments can be completed.

If all the damages inflicted on the victims can be recovered by the compensation payment, completion of the payment will mark the recovery and the end of the accident, making the event itself a page of the past. If that is the case, then prompt payment of the compensation should be the foremost focus of the policies for rebuilding Fukushima. However, victims do not feel that the damages they have suffered have been recovered by the payments, and the payments do not seem to directly translate to rebuilding of their normal lives. Furthermore, prospect for the "reconstruction" of the regions affected by the accident is still unclear (as we will point out later, the definition of "recovery/reconstruction" is multi-faceted). [^9] The compensation payment system assumes that the victims can recover the conditions of their lives prior to the damages through the payment, and start anew. However, for the victims of Fukushima accident, compensation may allow them to make ends meet from day-to-day but various obstacles would still exist that prevent them from restarting new lives, and thus many of the victims still do not have clear prospects for rebuilding their new lives. For example, if you are in fishery, because the effects of radioactive contamination still persist and you can only engage in experimental operations, you still cannot reopen normal fishing operations. For farmers, a rigid inspection of radioactive materials is in place and the products can be verified to be safe based at least on the standards set by the government. Nevertheless, as consumers are psychologically concerned about radioactive contamination of agricultural soil, products "from Fukushima" are still being avoided, resulting in lowered prices, and difficulties for the Fukushima farmers remain. Furthermore, a number of senior citizens who were forced to leave their hometowns have difficulty getting used to wherever they have relocated to, and are forced to live lonely lives. There have also been reports on children who moved from Fukushima who have been bullied by others in their new schools. The fact that payment of compensation will not directly rebuild the lives of victims is an inherent limitation of the laws regarding compensation, but this limitation becomes even more apparent in a case of nuclear accident, where the foundations of local communities and regional industry are fundamentally damaged.

Thus, in reality, there are components of compensation payments that do not directly result in full recovery of individual lives nor the rebuilding of local communities, and so the appropriateness of victims’ relief that focuses on compensation payment is being questioned. Despite large amounts of compensation being paid out relatively quickly, why did such a contradiction occur? In order to shed more light on this matter, we need to reconsider the very nature of the compensation payment system.

#### Inherent Limitations of the Compensation System for Nuclear Accident Damages

The compensation system establishes the final monetary amount to be paid to the victims, by officially determining and acknowledging the types of "damages" (compensatory damages) to be paid by the damaging party, from among various tangible and intangible "losses" actually inflicted on the victims (general damages), and also by assessing the degree of such damages. Victims can ultimately forcefully collect the designated compensation amount through lawsuits. On the other hand, "damages" that are excluded from compensation are considered not worth legal protection. As a result, in the current compensation system, "damages" that are excluded from compensation become intangible. Furthermore, any "damages" that exceed the acknowledged monetary amount would also be considered non-existent. And payment of an acknowledged amount will mean that the damages have been mended.

In general, when making use of such a compensation system, victims do their best to have their "damages" officially acknowledged and, once that is accomplished, take actions to increase the amount of compensation so that the public will also acknowledge the severity of the “damages.” However, there are inherent limitations in such behavior. So long as the compensation payment is an alternative method of relief when damages are irreversible, it would be a type of legal fiction to assume that the "damages" will have been recovered by the compensation. Unlike a financial loss, victims who suffer from psychological trauma will not be able to recover their original states. Therefore, supplementing the damages by compensation payment and to pretend as though the damages had never occurred is apparently legal fiction. And if that is the case, no matter how efficient the compensation system may be, there will always be a gap between the compensation and the recovery of damages. Furthermore, once certain damages are excluded from the range of compensations, such damages are deemed to be non-existent in legal view regardless of the actual "damages" that had occurred. In this sense, compensation payment brings segmentation to the damages inflicted on the victims, and this structure creates suffering with the victims. Of course, this per se is not limited to nuclear accidents, since victims of traffic or medical accidents face the same problems. However, with those victims, it can be said that the functions of the compensation payment systems will bring results that are acceptable to the victims; whereas with nuclear accident victims, the situation is quite different.

##### Damages that Cannot be Recovered Individually

First, the current compensation payment system is structured with focus on itemized damages inflicted on each individual or company. That is, the current system is designed to compensate for the loss to an individual that is worth legal protection. Loss of contribution or interest that an individual could have gained would be compensated as financial damages, while loss of non-financial interests would be deemed to be under consolation money. In traffic, medical, or pharmaceutical accidents, the majority of damages is against specific individuals. Therefore, the compensation system focused on individuals functions well in these cases. However, in the nuclear accident, especially in the forced evacuation zone, there was complete and fundamental destruction. Damages caused to the land, housing, business, and business operations of the residents in the forced evacuation zone can be acknowledged as generating individual damages. But victims who were forced to evacuate not only lost their assets and means of living, but also the local community which served as the home ground of their daily lives. This is a significant characteristic of the damages caused by the nuclear accident that is different from other types of damages that have occurred in the past. Therefore, damages inflicted on the residents in the forced evacuation zone are clearly different from the damages from traffic or medical accidents that do not affect the local community where the victims live. Although nuclear damages share certain similarities with air pollution in a sense that they affect a large geographical area, there is no comparison in its severity. When dealing with area-wide damages that affect an entire region, such as by the nuclear accident, the current compensation payment framework that focuses on individual victims cannot fully satisfy the needs. Simply accumulating damages inflicted on individual victims cannot draw a comprehensive picture of the various damages caused to the local community.

However, at present, there are no well-developed theories in the current compensation payment law to understand the damages caused to an entire region. Therefore, to become applicable under the current compensation system, all damages, regardless of the type, must be considered as individual losses. And so long as the system is ultimately designed to recover damages inflicted on individuals, it is difficult to apply such a system to compensate for damages that cannot be associated with specific individuals. In short, the current compensation system, developed with focus on individuals, cannot meet the needs to recover damages by a nuclear accident brought to an entire region or group of residents, and this mismatch is what causes the current system to be dysfunctional.

*Endless Recurrence of Losses*

The second factor that limits the function of the nuclear accident compensation system is the aspect of time of the occurrence. As mentioned before, for damages caused by traffic or medical accidents, a specific time of occurrence can be identified, and while the effect of the damages may be sustained in the future (such as an aftereffect), the damages themselves are transient. On the other hand, with the nuclear accident, substantial damages are continuously being generated even after the accident, forcing the victims to live with them. First of all, since radioactive substances dispersed by the nuclear accident have not been completely cleaned up even in decontaminated areas, damages resulting from low level radioactive rays generated by these radioactive materials (low level radiation exposure) may continue to occur for a long time. There are different opinions regarding the possibility of actual health damages due to low level radiation exposure, but we must at least recognize the fact that anxiety caused by fear of low level exposure will persist. Second, due to an extended evacuation order and due to consideration for dangers from low level exposure, the infrastructure for local livelihood was destroyed. Because of this, even though the evacuation order has been lifted, many residents continue to remain evacuated. Many still live in temporary housing and face various inconveniences continuously, which force us to acknowledge that new damages are being created on a daily basis. Third, farmers and fishermen also continue to suffer from damages. For example, for fishermen, true recovery means being able to operate at sea in Fukushima, like before. However, contaminated water from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant continues to flow into the sea, and because decommissioning of the reactor is still in progress, it is not certain when they will be able to return to regular operations. While they hope to begin normal operations as soon as possible, compensations for the interruption of business that they are currently receiving will stop as soon as normal operations begin. Yet, there is no guarantee that they will be able to continue regular operations without problems, and this uncertainty makes them hesitant to start the normal operations.

Therefore, damages that are paid out through the compensation system need to be determined within a limited time frame. However, this means that some of the damages will be excluded from compensation, and damages that continue to affect the victims will not be taken into consideration. Needless to say, it is theoretically possible to identify damages that occur after a compensation has been paid, as newly generated damages, and list them for compensation payment. In reality, however, once the scope of damages of the nuclear accident has been established, acknowledging newly occurred damages as those that are directly relevant to the nuclear accident requires proving the causal relationships, which can be extremely difficult.[^10] In short, while the damages resulting from the nuclear accident will continue to affect victims in the future, the compensation system only covers transient damages that are commonly assumed to occur and, as a result, victims of nuclear accidents will continue to feel like their losses were not completely redressed, even if they have received compensation for them up to a certain period in time.

#### Relying on the Compensation System

Considering these issues, we are faced with a fundamental problem of how much we should rely on the compensation system in order to recover damages caused by the nuclear accident. As has been discussed earlier, compensation payment alone is not sufficient for victims’ relief. Needless to say, the principle of “complete compensation for damages” must be observed. Victims have the right to demand compensation from the assailant. Obfuscating this principle will prevent an accurate calculation of nuclear power generation costs and will move discussions on nuclear power policies toward the wrong direction. On the other hand, we must also be aware that compensation payment for the Fukushima nuclear accident has caused the following segmentation among the victims of the earthquake and nuclear accident in terms of the compensation standards that were applied, thus making it difficult to rebuild the affected region.

Those segmentations are a) victims of the earthquake/tsunami and nuclear accidents, b) forced and voluntary (outside of the zone) evacuees, and c) segmentation caused by residential zones of the forced evacuees (zone preparing to have the evacuation order lifted, residence restricted zone, and difficult-to-return zone). Meeting certain requirements determines eligibility to receive legal effects—this is an essential attribute of modern law and such decisions would normally be expected without causing any major issues. However, in the case of nuclear damages, and particularly for the victims of forced evacuation when their local communities were completely destroyed (unlike the metropolitan Tokyo area, in the Tohoku region that was struck by the Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami, including Fukushima prefecture, there were strong local communities supporting people’s daily lives), the current compensation system may anchor the segmentation, making it even worse. When dealing with the relief for the victims of the nuclear accident, we are forced to admit that the current compensation system can provide only limited capabilities.

We must first face the doubt that under the circumstances, damages that normally are not recoverable or problems that are not solvable through the current compensation system might have been forcibly processed within the framework of the current system. Secondly, we must recognize the limitations of the compensation system and the scope of compensation, and thirdly, discuss various mechanisms that can possibly compensate for such shortcomings. To begin, we need to seriously discuss what it means to recover from the damages of the nuclear accident. It would not be possible to easily arrive at a clear-cut answer to this question, so we need to be prepared to deal with multiple solutions after carefully examining each of the conditions of the damages. For example, under a general social security program, we may need to flexibly combine the following to compensate for damages that will continue to occur, or may newly occur, in order to meet the various needs of the victims and the affected areas while stimulating creative ideas for rebuilding them: a life-long medical treatment program for all Japanese citizens who were exposed to low level radiations, housing aid for not only the residents of the forced evacuation zone but for all citizens who evacuated out of fear from radiation exposure, continuous aid to affected municipalities, aid for NGOs that support the victims, a system to provide financial aid for new and existing businesses in the affected areas, and a system to maintain and rebuild the local community in the affected area.

Of course, it is also true that, for the victims, the compensation payment system is the primary means of recovery. In the following section, we will discuss problems that exist in the design of the current compensation system.

Topics for Discussion Regarding the Compensation System

What Japan experienced after the Fukushima nuclear accident raised many topics for discussion regarding the design of a compensation payment system, including the scope of losses, range of damages subject to compensation, and who should be responsible for the payment. Here, we will discuss the following topics in order: (1) scope of victims of the nuclear accident, (2) scope of damages, and (3) who is responsible for compensation, and (4) method of dispute resolution.

1.  *Scope of Victims of the Nuclear Accident*

Evacuation zone defined with a concentric circle

First, there is room for discussion regarding evacuees who were forced to evacuate through government order. Those forced evacuees are clearly the victims of the nuclear accident. However, delimitating the mandatory evacuation zone itself is a difficult issue. At first, the Japanese government determined the mandatory evacuation zone using a concentric circle centered around the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant (ultimately set at a 20 km radius), but then later extended the area more to the northwest according to actual radioactive contamination. However, this evacuation zone did not necessarily match the actual radioactive contamination conditions and thus led to criticism for its arbitrariness. On the other hand, during the early stages, because the conditions of the contamination were not fully understood and there was also a high risk of further leakage of radioactive substances from the power plant, it probably is not fair to criticize the decision to set an evacuation zone on a concentric circle. However, there is a need to discuss whether the distance of 20 km was appropriate and whether it was necessary to draw lines that divided the local municipality. In terms of the former issue, considering the risk of low-level radiation exposure, the question is whether a wider area was needed to be designated as a mandatory evacuation zone. At the time, the Japanese government used the standard of 20 SV a year to arrive at its decision, but many people in Japan disagree with the appropriateness of this standard.

In addition, immediately after the accident, the US government designated a 50 mile (approximately 80 km) radius from the power plant to be the evacuation zone for US citizens staying in Japan, raising questions regarding the appropriateness of the zone as defined by the Japanese government and concerns for safety spread especially among the residents outside of the mandatory evacuation zone. As for the latter issue, it became an issue only because the evacuation zone was directly linked to the standard of compensation, and the resulting differences in the amount of compensation among residents within the same local municipality led to segmentation of that local community. During the emergency period immediately after the accident, it may have been necessary to use a concentric circle to define the evacuation zone as a temporary measure. However, following this period, the zone should be redefined according to actual radiation levels, and through established procedures. In Japan, the evacuation zone was reevaluated several times but the procedure lacked transparency. The concentric evacuation zones were maintained until April 2014 after which evacuation orders were consecutively lifted for areas with low radiation levels. However, these reevaluations should also be discussed in terms of validity of dividing a local municipality.

Finally, designating an evacuation zone has a substantial social effect on not only the relevant area but also the community accepting the evacuees from it. Therefore, we need to understand that designating evacuation zones is a potentially highly political negotiation. What might the effects be of, for example, designating an area with a high population concentration as an evacuation zone? Although the "Child Victim Support Law" was established in 2012 to support the right of evacuation for children and adult victims, there was no realistic policy to put this right into effect and there are strong criticisms that the law is not actually being realized.

These two points must be taken into further consideration regarding the treatment of those who evacuated from the areas outside of the evacuation zone, which we will discuss in the next section. Overall, radiation levels are not the only factors that delimits an evacuation zone, and so there needs to be more transparent and effective laws in place to guarantee the "right to evacuate" for residents of areas with high radiation levels that are outside the evacuation zone.

Evacuees from outside the evacuation zone. The more critical second topic of discussion is whether to acknowledge the so-called voluntary evacuees, who evacuated to different areas from areas not designated as evacuation zones (either within or outside Fukushima prefecture) in order to escape from the dangers of radioactive exposure. Radiation contamination by the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant is not confined to the mandatory evacuation zone but had spread to central Fukushima including Fukushima City and Koriyama City, as well as to the northern Kanto area that includes Tochigi prefecture and all the way to the metropolitan regions of these areas, though the contamination level is generally lower. “Voluntary” evacuees from these regions would likely never have relocated unless the nuclear accident had occurred, and were in reality forced to evacuate.

Based on the concentric circle model determining the evacuation zone, however, these evacuees are considered voluntary and any damages claimed as associated with the nuclear accident became a topic of dispute. Lawsuits were filed by voluntary evacuees requesting compensation and after March 2017 the Japanese government did acknowledge some of the voluntary evacuees as victims of the nuclear accident, and TEPCO has paid compensation voluntarily. However, it is problematic that the scope of voluntary evacuees eligible for compensation is limited to only those who were residents of Fukushima prefecture at the time of the accident as—there are areas outside of Fukushima that are affected by similar levels of contamination. Further problems arose as even forced evacuees from designated evacuation zones were considered voluntary evacuees if they remained relocated after evacuation orders were lifted. In fact, after the evacuation order was lifted, in most of the municipalities, only a small population of the residents have returned, and the number of voluntary evacuees are increasing, raising more complications regarding questions of compensation.

Business operators and municipalities. Nuclear accident victims are not limited to those citizens who were forced to evacuate. Many business operators inside and outside of the evacuation zone suffered from financial losses due to disruptions in their businesses and reduction in sales after reopening. Even if an evacuation order is lifted, it does not mean that market conditions will return or that they will return at previously experienced levels, creating great long-term difficulties for businesses and the municipalities they operate in. Indeed, local municipalities within the evacuation zone are also victims in their own right. Not only did they face various expenditures because of the accident, their assets (movable property/real estate) were also damaged. Local municipalities and TEPCO have different opinions regarding the calculation methods for compensation. The central government provided financial aid to the local municipalities after the accident, and evaluation of financial aid in relation to the damages became a topic of dispute.

2.  *Scope of Damages*

Scope of damages refers to the range of damages inflicted on victims that are acknowledged as being subject to compensation. The following detailed calculations are performed to determine the amount of compensation for such acknowledged damages, and payments are made for that amount.

Reputational damages of business operators

Under Japanese law, damages that have causal relation with the nuclear accident are subject to compensation, including compensation for both financial losses (assets/income) and non-economic damages (consolation money). As for financial losses, payments were made to the victims who had lost their assets/income from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident. A "reputation damage" refers to a financial loss resulting from consumers' reluctance to purchase products such as agricultural and marine products and travel to tourist spots out of safety concerns, regardless of whether the government declared the area safe. Farmers, fishermen, and tourist business operators (travel agencies, tourist entertainment facilities, hotels and inns) demanded compensation for reputation damages from the Fukushima nuclear accident. However, not all business operators were able to receive reputation damage compensation.

When business operators request compensation for reputation damages, they usually file a collective lawsuit through an association such as a business organization or an agricultural cooperative. Businesses who do not belong to any organizations must pay the fee for the lawsuit themselves, thus making it difficult for them to demand compensation for reputation damages. In addition, when requesting compensation for reputation damages, it is important to submit past business reports to prove such financial losses did actually result from consumers' reluctance to purchase. Reputation damage is determined and the compensation is calculated by first using business data from the last 5 years (including list of products for each production date, the production amount, expenses and other items) and averaging monthly revenue based on the previous 3 years, and the difference between that amount and the production amount of after the nuclear accident. Fluctuations in production volume and the production amount of each item is also taken into consideration. If there is no sufficient business data accumulated, the amount of compensation will be greatly reduced.

Despite difficulties documenting losses to file for reputational damage, payments for to business operators were significantly larger than past cases of damage compensation, due in part to the large gap between the government’s safety standards and those of general consumers. The appropriateness of the amount was greatly discussed. If we respect the principle of “full compensation for damages," compensation for reputation damages paid to businesses should be considered appropriate. However, with the Fukushima nuclear accident, it is clear that the amount of compensation greatly differs depending on the type of financial damage, and compensation paid to voluntary evacuees is much lower than those paid to business operators. If compensation calculated according to past business data are to be considered appropriate, then we must conclude that compensation paid to voluntary evacuees are unjustifiably low.

#### Non-economic Damages of Forced Evacuees

When it comes to assessing non-economic damages, the focus of dispute has long been how to calculate the standard compensation for forced evacuees. The evacuees, beginning with a sudden evacuation order, were forced to live in a harsh environment for an extended period of time. Residents in the "difficult-to-return" zones have essentially lost their hometowns and residents in “zones in preparation for lift of evacuation order” and “restricted living zones,” even when they are permitted to return, face local communities that have been destroyed and hometowns that have completely changed. Given the risk and uncertainty of low-level radioactive exposure, deteriorated infrastructure and failed local social systems, only a handful of people decided to immediately return to evacuated zones. There is no doubt that such conditions inflict a great amount of non-economic damages on evacuees yet it is difficult to evaluate such damages and calculate monetary amounts. The difficulties caused by evacuation itself can be clarified to a certain extent. There is also no doubt that the existence of a hometown and the functions of the local community play important roles in victims lives. However, the nature of these elements is ambiguous and subjective, making it difficult to uniformly define and establish damages.

Even if non-economic damages are identified as damages per se, it would be a challenge to calculate a monetary amount adequate to their repair. In the case of Fukushima, the Dispute Resolution Committee for Nuclear Damage Compensation calculated the standard compensation amount for non-economic damages of victims to be 100,000 yen a month, but this was strongly criticized by the victims in part because this compensation standard was created based on insufficient investigation. Since objective calculation of compensation is difficult for non-economic damages, validity is established only after a sufficient fact-finding survey is conducted, which includes hearings from the victims. The Dispute Resolution Committee consists of legal professionals but their opinions alone cannot validate the pre-defined standards. The underlying reasons for the compensation standards have also become targets of criticism. In August 2011, the Committee stated that they referenced traffic accident compensation standards to determine compensation guidelines—clearly very different from non-economic damages caused by forced evacuation, ranging from separation of families, reduced income, hardship, fear of radioactive exposure, anxieties about an uncertain future, and psychological trauma.

To this end, the validity of the compensation standard is itself in question. Under the current compensation payment system, damages that were inflicted on a region must be processed as individual compensations, which must be accurately detailed in order to be taken into consideration. Evacuees with substantial non-economic damages thus have no choice but to give up on compensation claims entirely, unless they can produce evidence of non-economic damage. Many victims are not satisfied with the amount determined by the Resolution Committee. Reflecting this, the amounts requested are always higher than the compensation standard in lawsuits that victims have filed in different places, and in the appeals made to the Dispute Resolution Center for Nuclear Damage Compensation.

#### Compensation for Non-economic Damages for Voluntary Evacuees

Voluntary evacuees from within the prefecture of Fukushima are also acknowledged as victims and compensation was made for their non-economic damages and for increased daily expenses. However, compensation paid to voluntary evacuees was much lower than that which was paid to forced evacuees. For this reason, many voluntary evacuees filed lawsuits to demand more payment but the amount determined by the court is generally still low. And while free housing had been provided by the local municipalities where voluntary evacuees settled, this support measure ended at the end of March 2017. As illustrated by these examples, voluntary evacuees are not sufficiently acknowledged as victims and it is therefore important to discuss how to deal with this problem—the extreme differences between how forced and voluntary evacuees are treated currently in Japan is beyond acceptable limits.

#### Who is Responsible for Compensation?

In Japan, the Nuclear Damage Compensation Act provides that the operator of a nuclear power plant (the electric power company) is solely responsible for compensatory payments and assumes absolute liability for damages caused by a nuclear accident. However, after the Fukushima nuclear accident, it was advocated that the government should assume legal responsibility together with the nuclear operator. The promotion of nuclear power had been a consistent national policy of the Japanese government and thus without the government's support nuclear power plants would not have propagated in Japan. In addition, the government did not exercise its regulatory authority over TEPCO despite being aware of the dangers of nuclear accidents from large-scale tsunamis caused by big earthquakes. Thus, many of the lawsuits filed by the victims vehemently pursue the government’s responsibility as well as that of TEPCO, and court judgements by the Maebashi District Court in March 2017 and the Fukushima District Court in October 2017 both acknowledged this mutual responsibility.

Further discussions were had about whether the nuclear operator’s responsibility is unlimited or limited. If the responsibility is limited, it follows that excesses of this limit should be the government’s responsibility. The Nuclear Damage Compensation Act does not limit the responsibility of the operator and places no compensatory responsibility on the government (if the operator goes bankrupt, then any unlimited responsibility becomes meaningless). Revisions to the Nuclear Damage Compensation Act were presented to limit the responsibility of the operator while making the government the agent of responsibility. It is presumed that limiting the compensation responsibilities of the nuclear operator to a certain fixed amount, regardless of the amount, risks lowering the safety awareness of the operators, which may thus lead to a moral hazard. And since the government's responsibility for compensation ultimately becomes the burden of the general public, there is strong opposition in Japanese civil society toward limited liability. Thus for the time being in Japan, unlimited responsibility of the nuclear power operator will continue.

However, after the nuclear accident, the Japanese government established the Nuclear Damage Compensation Facilitation Corporation and assumed the responsibility for compensatory payments by pouring large amounts of capital into TEPCO through this corporation. This means that, regardless of whether the nuclear power operator assumes limited liability, in case of a large-scale nuclear disaster, the government becomes the primary agent of responsibility. This is because it is politically impossible to stop compensatory payments to victims if assets of the nuclear power operator are depleted. As long as the government permits potentially dangerous nuclear power generation, the government must be legally responsible not only for the compensatory payments but also for the recovery of life of each victim and the rebuilding of the local community.

**Method of Dispute Resolution**

If the compensation acknowledged by the nuclear power operator or the government is not sufficient to cover the entire damage, disputes will arise between the nuclear power operator/central government and the victims. In the case of the Fukushima nuclear accident, the following two points regarding procedures for the victims in pursuing the responsibility of TEPCO for compensation became topics of dispute. First, civil litigation procedures in Japan lack a system to integrate allegations of multiple individuals who are involved in the case, similar to class-action lawsuits in the US, for cases involving compensation for damages resulting from unlawful acts such as a nuclear accident. This shortcoming becomes especially critical when relatively small amounts of damages are involved with a large number of victims. After the Fukushima accident, the Dispute Resolution Center for Nuclear Damage Compensation was established as an alternative dispute resolution. Highlighting the shortcomings of this system, the town of Namie filed a claim with the Center as representatives of over 15,000 residents and demanding increased compensation for non-economic damages.

Second, victims took issue with the lack of actual results of the alternative dispute resolution procedure. The Dispute Resolution Center offers mediation and conciliation and not arbitration. At first, it was discussed whether or not the settlement proposed by the Center should have binding authority only towards TEPCO. Because TEPCO repeatedly expressed its willingness to sincerely accept the settlements that the Center proposed, the idea of a unilateral binding of authority was not adopted. During the several years after the accident, TEPCO always accepted the settlement proposed by the Center and so dispute resolution by the center remained functional. However, beginning with the spring of 2014, TEPCO began to refuse settlement proposals for some of the cases, including the aforementioned allegation by the town of Namie, and especially settlement proposals for collective complaints.The government has been implicitly allowing these refusals. Consequently, disputes have not been resolved swiftly for many of the victims. As described, since many of the victims are not satisfied with the standard determined by the Dispute Resolution Committee, it is a grave issue that the means of dispute resolution are not functioning as expected. Therefore, in order to cope with the dissatisfaction of the victims, this matter requires legal and political means, such as establishing new compensation guidelines or assigning unilateral binding authority to the Center’s proposals.

#### Compensatory Payments and Recovery

Various issues that surround the current compensation system are also intricately related with the meaning of "recovery” and “restoration. Compensation for damages is normally paid for what was lost. However, a nuclear accident takes away not only the past but also the present and the future from the victims. Now that 9 years have passed since the Fukushima nuclear accident, the completion of compensatory payments, the lifting of evacuation orders, and the resuming of normal farming and fishery, are often equated with completion of the "recovery" period. However, for victims of the nuclear accident, damages are still ongoing and recovery remains a goal in a distant future. We need to understand the damages caused by the nuclear accident and the responsibility for compensation in ways that are aligned with the long-term recovery process. Compensation is only a step towards, but is not the same as, recovery.　

The very ambiguous meanings of recovery can themselves cause problems amongst the various actors affected by the Fukushima nuclear disaster. In the 9 years since, the Japanese government has put forth various efforts for the recovery of Fukushima. The Reconstruction Design Council that was established in April 2011 immediately after the earthquake and tsunami discussed various policies aimed at the reconstruction, with many intellectual figures with close ties with the Tohoku region. On June 25 of the same year, the government announced new guidelines for reconstruction, appointed a Minister for Reconstruction, and in February of 2012 established the Reconstruction Agency, prompting various reconstruction projects for several years. However, no clear definition of recovery is found in their "Recommendations on Reconstruction Planning" nor in any of the documents issued by the Reconstruction Agency.

Some would see recovery as returning to life before the disaster, while others consider recovery as a way of life with hope for the future, even if that life has changed since before the disaster. Furthermore, the definition of recovery is even more complex for the victims of the Fukushima nuclear accident. Those who had evacuated, those who did not, those who have returned and those that did not - the damages and losses that these victims suffer vary widely, and many of these damages are irreversible. Nonetheless, they must all continue to face forward and live their lives. Given such varied forms of recovery, we cannot depend solely on the uniform policies of the central government. In order to promote recovery that suits the various needs of Fukushima, the role of municipalities, and their cooperation with one another, is critical to the design and implementation of a compensatory payment system that targets and helps individual victims and the regions they call home.

####  Conclusion: Building a New Compensation System

The primary objective of a compensatory payment system that is utilized for nuclear accident victims is the recovery of damages inflicted on them. However, what the victims truly need and desire is a recovery of the peaceful life before the accident. Compensation does not bring forth a recovery of the original life and must be only an option when no other alternative measures can satisfy this need. For a true recovery, victims’ local communities need to be rebuilt, which is difficult to imagine let alone achieve under the current compensation system that does not acknowledge the destruction of a community as a loss. Compensation for individual victims is not going to rebuild a destroyed community alone, and the lives of victims who had interactive relationships with other people in their communities cannot be rebuilt satisfactorily.

The experience of the Fukushima nuclear accident indicates that we need a compensation system that leads to better future lives for the victims individually and collectively. For example, if nuclear accident victims residing in the mandatory evacuation zone were to file a collective lawsuit and under some mutual agreement contribute a part of awarded compensation to fund the rebuilding of their local communities, we may be able to better visualize damages to communities that could not be recovered through individual compensation alone.

Fundamentally, compensatory payments are for settling of the past. However, in the case of a nuclear accident where damages are continuously reproduced, compensation for past damages must be made in ways to generate new dynamism that leads to building of a new future. It will thus be necessary to establish such a system in collaboration of the victims, and by incorporating the opinions of various organizations that are active in the local areas, basic municipalities that assume primary responsibilities for the area, as well as international organizations. Such collaboration will in turn help establish better working conditions for recovery. To fulfill our responsibility as citizens who live with the Fukushima nuclear accident, we will continue to examine the limits of the current compensation system and explore possibilities to improve its functions, thereby continuing to think of what we can do to recover the peaceful life before the accident that victims truly desire.

\[Note: This research project was financially supported by Japan Law Foundation (Project No.109 (2014-2015)). On this occasion, we express our sincere thanks to the Foundation.\]

[^1]: “Compensation Payment Status,” TEPCO, 2020, https://www.tepco.co.jp/fukushima_hq/compensation/results/.

[^2]: “Results of the consultation business and the content of the consultation,” Nuclear Damage Compensation and Decommissioning Facilitation Corporation, 2020

    http://www.ndf.go.jp/press/at2020/20200703.html.

[^3]: Attorney White Paper 2019

    <https://www.nichibenren.or.jp/library/pdf/document/statistics/2019/3-6-4_2019.pdf>

[^4]: Actually no lawsuits have reached the supreme court’s rulings as of October 15,2020.

[^5]: Japanese Government Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, “Fukushima ni okeru hinan no gaikyo” (The status of evacuatioin in Fukushima)

    https://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/shingi/chousa/kaihatu/016/shiryo/\_\_icsFiles/afieldfile/2011/09/21/1311103_1\_2.pdf. 

[^6]: Fukushima Prefectural Federation of Fisheries Cooperative Associations, 2020, http://www.fsgyoren.jf-net.ne.jp/siso/sisotop.html.

[^7]: Author, “Title Written in English,” *Nihon Keizai Shinbun*, July 12, 2016,

    https://www.nikkei.com/article/DGXLASHC11H4A_S6A710C1000000/.

[^8]: Tokyo Electric Power Company Holdings Inc., "Compensatory Payment for Nuclear Damages,” September 8, 2017. With the aid from the government, as of November 11, 2016, Tokyo Electric Power Company has paid a substantial amount of compensation (app. 6.4972 trillion yen) to many victims (app. 859,000 cases of forced evacuees, app. 1,295,000 cases of voluntary evacuees, and approximately 366,000 cases of corporate and individual business operators). During the 8 months period, the company has paid nearly 1 trillion yen in compensation.

[^9]: For example, in the case of Namie-cho, where residents were forced to evacuate after the nuclear accident, although the evacuation order was lifted at the end of March 2017 except in certain areas, of the total population of 18,020, only 440 people have returned as of the end of November 2017.

[^10]: Evacuation order after the nuclear disaster has been lifted in some mandatory evacuation zones, and some residents have returned. However, there have been cases reported of difficulties in maintaining businesses by the returned business operators, and these are becoming obstacles for residents to return or towards rebuilding. For these instances, Tokyo Electric Power Company maintains that compensatory payments have been completed, and that these reported difficulties are not related to the nuclear disaster. Under the current compensation system, it is not easy to get acknowledgment that such revenue losses of the business to have been derived from the nuclear disaster.
